MathiasMagnus SAXPY tutorial (#3487)
ROCm-Developer-Tools/HIP: docs/tutorial/saxpy.rst

.. meta::
  :description: The SAXPY tutorial on HIP
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, SAXPY, tutorial

*******************************************************************************
Tutorial: SAXPY - Hello, HIP
*******************************************************************************

This tutorial explains the basic concepts of the single-source

> Heterogeneous-computing Interface for Portability (HIP) programming model and

Reviewer: Can we change it to HIP (Heterogeneous-computing Interface) programming model. I think most people will call it HIP instead of its full name.

Author: This is defined by our documentation styling guide, and we are using the same at other locations. "The full text and then the acronym in parenthesis, and the following references use the acronym."

Example:
https://github.com/ROCm/HIP/blob/develop/docs/index.md

install instructions is more than worth covering as part of this tutorial. For
more information about installing HIP development packages, see
:doc:`/install/install`.

.. _hip-tutorial-saxpy-heterogeneous-programming

Heterogeneous programming
=========================

*Heterogeneous programming* and *offloading APIs* are often mentioned together. Heterogeneous programming deals with devices of varying capabilities
simultaneously. Offloading focuses on the "remote" and asynchronous aspects of
computation. HIP encompasses both. It exposes GPGPU (general-purpose GPU)
programming much like ordinary host-side CPU programming and lets you move data
across various devices.

When programming in HIP (and other heterogenous APIs for that matter), remember
that target devices are built for a specific purpose. They are designed with
different tradeoffs than traditional CPUs and therefore have very different
performance characteristics. Even subtle changes in code might adversely affect
execution time.

Your first lines of HIP code
============================

First, let's do the "Hello, World!" of GPGPU: SAXPY. *SAXPY* is a mathematical

> acronym; a vector equation :math:`a\cdot x+y=z` where :math:`a\in\mathbb{R}` is

Reviewer: I think you have mentioned SAXPY's full form below. Can we move it up here.

Author: Added.

(IEEE 754 binary32 representation).

To quickly get started, use the set of `HIP samples from GitHub
<https://github.com/amd/rocm-examples/>`_. With Git configured on your machine,
open a command-line and navigate to your desired working directory, then run:

.. code-block:: shell

  git clone https://github.com/amd/rocm-examples.git

A simple implementation of SAXPY resides in the ``HIP-Basic/saxpy/main.hip``
file in this repository. The HIP code here mostly deals with where data
has to be and when, and how devices transform this data. The first HIP calls
deal with allocating device-side memory and dispatching data from host-side
memory in a C runtime-like fashion.

.. code-block:: C++

  // Allocate and copy vectors to device memory.
  float* d_x{};
  float* d_y{};
  HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc(&d_x, size_bytes));
  HIP_CHECK(hipMalloc(&d_y, size_bytes));
  HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(d_x, x.data(), size_bytes, hipMemcpyHostToDevice));
  HIP_CHECK(hipMemcpy(d_y, y.data(), size_bytes, hipMemcpyHostToDevice));

``HIP_CHECK`` is a custom macro borrowed from the examples utilities which
checks the error code returned by API functions for errors and reports them to

> the console. It's not essential to the API.

Reviewer: It is not essential to the API but it is a good practice to check the error codes of the HIP APIs incase you pass on incorrect values to the API or the API might be out of resources.

Author: Added.

- The function does not return anything, because there is no trivial way to
  construct a return channel of a parallel invocation. Device-side entrypoints
  may not return a value, their results should be communicated using output
  parameters.
- Device-side functions are typically called compute kernels, or just kernels
  for short. This is to distinguish them from non-graphics-related graphics
  shaders, or just shaders for short.
- Arguments are taken by value and all arguments shall be
  `TriviallyCopyable <https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/named_req/TriviallyCopyable>`_,
  meaning they should be `memcpy`-friendly. _(Imagine if they had custom copy
  constructors. Where would that logic execute? On the host? On the device?)_
  Pointer arguments are pointers to device memory, one typically backed by
  VRAM.
- We said that we'll be computing :math:`a\cdot x+y=z`, however we only pass
  two pointers to the function. We'll be canonically reusing one of the inputs
  as outputs.

This function is launched from the host using a language extension often called
the triple chevron syntax. Inside the angle brackets, provide the following.

> - The number of blocks to launch (our grid size)

Reviewer: Do we have any documentation describing grid and block sizes? If yes can we point the user to it from here. I think these are non trivial concepts and user who just wants to exec stuff on their GPU can go it it if they want to.

Author: Added.

- The number of threads in a block (our block size)
- The amount of shared memory to allocate by the host
- The device stream to enqueue the operation on

The block size and shared memory become important later in :doc:`reduction`. For
now, a hardcoded ``256`` is a safe default for simple kernels such as this.
Following the triple chevron is ordinary function argument passing.

Look at how the kernel is implemented.

.. code-block:: C++

  __global__ void saxpy_kernel(const float a, const float* d_x, float* d_y, const unsigned int size)
  {
      // Compute the current thread's index in the grid.
      const unsigned int global_idx = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x;

      // The grid can be larger than the number of items in the vectors. Avoid out-of-bounds addressing.
      if(global_idx < size)
      {
          d_y[global_idx] = a * d_x[global_idx] + d_y[global_idx];
      }
  }

- The unique linear index identifying the thread is computed from the block id
  the thread is a member of, the block's size and the id of the thread within
  the block.
- A check is made to avoid overindexing the input.
- The useful part of the computation is carried out.

> Retrieval of the result from the device is done much like its dispatching:

Reviewer: dispatching can mean different thing in context of HIP, can we change the wording here. Also the first memcpy should also be explained and here we can mention in simple terms that we are copying result back to host.

Author: Removed dispatching.

      $InstallationPath = Get-CimInstance MSFT_VSInstance | Sort-Object -Property Version -Descending | Select-Object -First 1 -ExpandProperty InstallLocation
      Import-Module $InstallationPath\Common7\Tools\Microsoft.VisualStudio.DevShell.dll
      Enter-VsDevShell -InstallPath $InstallationPath -SkipAutomaticLocation -Arch amd64 -HostArch amd64 -DevCmdArguments '-no_logo'

    You should be able to call the compiler on the command line now:

    .. code-block:: powershell

      nvcc --version

Invoking the compiler manually
------------------------------

To compile and link a single-file application, use the following commands:

.. tab-set::
  .. tab-item:: Linux and AMD
    :sync: linux-amd

    .. code-block:: bash

      amdclang++ ./HIP-Basic/saxpy/main.hip -o saxpy -I ./Common -lamdhip64 -L /opt/rocm/lib -O2

  .. tab-item:: Linux and NVIDIA
    :sync: linux-nvidia

    .. code-block:: bash

      nvcc ./HIP-Basic/saxpy/main.hip -o saxpy -I ./Common -I /opt/rocm/include -O2 -x cu

  .. tab-item:: Windows and AMD
    :sync: windows-amd

    .. code-block:: powershell

      clang++ .\HIP-Basic\saxpy\main.hip -o saxpy.exe -I .\Common -lamdhip64 -L ${env:HIP_PATH}lib -O2

>   .. tab-item:: Windows and NVIDIA

Reviewer: Have you tested this particular config? windows + nvidia?

Author: As I know, all the commands were tested. I can test this, today. Do you so problems with it?

Reviewer: I never really tested this config so was not sure. If it works I am more than OK with it.

    :sync: windows-nvidia

    .. code-block:: powershell

      nvcc .\HIP-Basic\saxpy\main.hip -o saxpy.exe -I ${env:HIP_PATH}include -I .\Common -O2 -x cu

Depending on your computer, the resulting binary might or might not run. If not,
it typically complains about "Invalid device function". That error
(corresponding to the ``hipErrorInvalidDeviceFunction`` entry of ``hipError_t``)
means that the runtime could not find a device program binary of the
appropriate flavor embedded into the executable.

So far, the discussion has covered how data makes it from the host to the
device and back. It has also discussed the device code as source, with the HIP
runtime arguing that the correct binary to dispatch for execution. How can you
find out what device binary flavors are embedded into the executable?

.. tab-set::

  .. tab-item:: Linux and AMD
    :sync: linux-amd

>     The utilities included with ROCm help significantly to inspect binary

Reviewer: I think binary inspection deserves its own doc, rather then putting it alongside saxpy explanation. In my head person looking for saxpy documentation will be least bothered with code object extraction and the person wanting to play with code objects will be least bothered with saxpy.

Author: We can put this feedback to a separate issue. Currently, we do not have binary inspection tutorial and at least we have some here now. 

If we finally have the binary inspection page, we can rethink this suggestion.  Maybe I can put this into a dropdown:
https://sphinx-design.readthedocs.io/en/latest/dropdowns.html

What do you think?

Reviewer: I would rather have its own page, playing with code objects might require a bit more detail and populating here will overcomplicate this tutorial.

Author: OK. I am creating a separate issue to remove the code inspection from here to a new code inspection tutorial. 

The Boy Scout Rule: Leave the campground cleaner than you found it. → I am merging this in. One tutorial better than zero, and we will improve this later.

.. meta::
  :description: The SAXPY tutorial on HIP
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, SAXPY, tutorial

*******************************************************************************
Tutorial: SAXPY - Hello, HIP
*******************************************************************************

This tutorial explains the basic concepts of the single-source
Heterogeneous-computing Interface for Portability (HIP) programming model and
the essential tooling around it. It also reviews some commonalities of
heterogenous APIs in general. This topic assumes basic familiarity with the
C/C++ compilation model and language.

Prerequisites
=============

To follow this tutorial, you'll need installed drivers and a HIP compiler
toolchain to compile your code. Because HIP for ROCm supports compiling and
running on Linux and Windows with AMD and NVIDIA GPUs, the combination of
install instructions is more than worth covering as part of this tutorial. For
more information about installing HIP development packages, see
:doc:`/install/install`.

.. _hip-tutorial-saxpy-heterogeneous-programming

Heterogeneous programming
=========================

> *Heterogeneous programming* and *offloading APIs* are often said in the same

Reviewer 2: Heterogeneous programming and offloading APIs are often mentioned together.

> breath. Heterogeneous programming deals with devices of varying capabilities

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*Heterogeneous programming* and *offloading APIs* are often mentioned together. Heterogeneous programming deals with devices of varying capabilities
```
